Life Insurance in Retirement Planning
HOW P ERMA NENT LIFE INSURANCE CAN HELP MEET YOUR
DEATH BENEFIT NEEDS AND ENHANCE YOUR RET IREMENT.

0251133-00002-00

Did You Know?
Many high-income and high-net worth
individuals will be taxed on most of their
retirement income, including their Social
Security benefits.
Are you prepared to pay taxes on all of your
retirement income?
Life insurance can offer you death benefit
protection PLUS the potential to build cash
value that you can use to help supplement
your retirement income on a tax-advantaged
basis.

THE MANY
BENEFITS OF
LIFE INSURANCE

Life insurance is a flexible tool that can help protect your family and more.
Life insurance provides a death benefit that can help your loved ones meet
their financial obligations after your death. The death benefit can be used to
help your loved ones:
• Maintain their current lifestyle.
• Pay off a mortgage.
• Help pay state and federal estate taxes.
A benefit for your life, too.
However, once in retirement, you may find that you have less of a need for
death benefit protection, and a greater need for tax-advantaged income.
Certain types of life insurance can provide both:
• A death benefit to protect your family.
• A source of supplemental income for your retirement.

SUPPLEMENT YOUR
RETIREMENT WITH
LIFE INSURANCE
If you are like many high-income earners,

you have, or are making an effort to, maximize your plan contributions while also
diversifying your total financial portfolio. But, even with your contributions maxed out,
you may not be certain of having enough income to maintain your desired standard of
living in retirement. If you are in this situation, a life insurance policy may be the answer.
That’s because life insurance with cash value growth potential can help you in three
distinct ways:

1
INCOME-TAX FREE
DEATH BENEFIT

A life insurance policy’s
death benefit offers a
typically income-tax
free death benefit.*

+

2
TAX-DEFERRED
CASH VALUE

Many life insurance
policies offer you the
potential to accumulate
tax-deferred cash
values.

+

3
TAX-ADVANTAGED
LOANS

These life insurance
policies also offer you
the option of taking taxadvantaged loans from
your policy’s cash value.**

A life insurance policy as part of our Life Insurance in Retirement Planning strategy
can be an important part of your financial strategy during your retirement years. That’s
because it offers you the chance to put a part of your assets in a product that features taxadvantaged growth potential.

Life insurance can
help you supplement
your retirement with
tax-advantaged cash
value.
*Death benefit proceeds are generally received federal income tax free as provided in Internal Revenue Code
Section 101(a).
**TAX-ADVANTAGED ACCESS TO CASH VALUE: You can access your cash value through loans and withdrawals.
In general, loans are not currently taxable, and withdrawals are taxable only when you take more money out
of the policy than you’ve paid in premiums. Loans and withdrawals may impact the ultimate death benefit
payable to your beneficiaries.

LIFE INSURANCE IN RETIREMENT PLANNING

Life Insurance in
Retirement Planning
The strategy can offer:
• An opportunity to increase your retirement income
if you are already maximizing your contributions to
qualified plans.
• Access to accumulated cash values for any reason,
including retirement income.
• The ability to add riders to the insurance policy for
greater protection and flexibility.
• The chance for small business owners to supplement
their existing retirement plans.
• The chance to delay taking your Social Security
benefits until later in life—potentially increasing your
monthly payout.

HOW CAN LIFE
INSURANCE HELP YOU
IN RETIREMENT?

Create a
Financial Strategy
In addition to the
concept discussed
here, you may
wish to develop a
financial strategy
to take into account
current and future
income and needs.

How The Strategy Works
To create income from a life insurance policy, you first need to choose a
policy designed to provide a death benefit and accumulate cash value. Your
financial professional can help you decide which might be most appropriate
for your financial goals and situation.

The Steps of the Strategy
1. Y
 ou pay premiums to keep the policy in force. Part of these premiums
will cover the costs associated with the policy, and part will go toward an
account that helps build cash value.
2. O
 ver time, the policy builds cash value, possibly enough to increase the
death benefit.

RETIREMENT

3. O
 nce you reach retirement (although you don’t need to wait until then),
you can access the cash value through loans and withdrawals (typically
federal income-tax free) to provide you with supplemental income when
you need it. Taking loans and withdrawals will reduce cash value as well
as the death benefit.
4. A
 t your death, the remaining death benefit will be paid to your
beneficiaries.

Important Information
About The Strategy For
You To Consider
•Y
 ou should have sufficient liquid assets to support your current and future
income and expenses before implementing this life insurance strategy. Equity
in a home should not be considered a liquid asset.
• This concept is only intended to be used with assets that will not be needed
for living expenses for the expected lifetime of the insured. You will need to
consider and estimate such needs as well as additional expenses. If you live
longer than expected or these assets are exhausted, additional assets may be
needed to pay the premiums to keep your policy in force.
• If your financial or legacy planning situation changes and you need to use
assets or income for current or future income needs and can no longer make
premium payments, your life insurance death benefit may terminate and your
desired results may not be achieved. Loans taken will become taxable upon
policy surrender or lapse.
•C
 onsult your professional tax and legal advisors when considering this strategy.

Life insurance
has the flexibility
to help you
protect and
enhance your
retirement.

LIFE INSURANCE IN RETIREMENT PLANNING

The Key to Making
the Strategy Work
Many people who purchase life insurance select the highest death benefit
amount to meet their protection needs and then select a policy that offers
the least amount of premium possible.
But, if you want your life insurance policy to have greater potential cash
value that you can access later in life, you may want to reverse that process:
•B
 uy a life insurance policy with a lower face amount (while still meeting
your protection needs).
• Maximize the premium payments you are making.
This approach—commonly called “overfunding a policy”—can help your life
insurance policy accumulate larger cash values than it typically would by
making only the minimum payments required to keep your policy active.

These values illustrate

These values illustrate

MAXIMUM death benefit
MINIMUM premium payment

MINIMUM death benefit
MAXIMUM premium payment

DEATH BENEFIT

CASH VALUE
This chart is for illustrative
purposes only and is not
predictive of actual returns.

What is
“Overfunding
a Policy”?
It is when
you buy a life
insurance policy
with a lower face
amount (while
still meeting your
protection needs)
and maximize
the premium
payments you are
making.*
Why “Overfund
a Policy”?
This approach
can help your
life insurance
policy accumulate
larger cash values
than it would if
you make only
the minimum
payments required
to keep your
policy active.

DEATH BENEFIT

CASH VALUE

Work with your financial professional to determine the strategy that will help
meet your financial needs.
*Federal tax law limits the amount of premium contributions that can be made to a policy in order for it to retain certain
tax advantages. When premium contributions exceed this limit, the policy is classified as a Modified Endowment
Contract (MEC). Distributions from MECs (such as loans, withdrawals and assignments, including distributions made in
the two years prior to becoming a MEC) are taxed less favorably than distributions from policies that are not MECs. For
distributions from a MEC prior to age 59½, a federal income tax penalty may also apply. However, death benefits are
still generally received income-tax free pursuant to IRC §101(a). Please consult a tax advisor. Life insurance policy cash
values are accessed through withdrawals and policy loans. Loans are at interest. Unpaid loans and withdrawals cause a
reduction in cash values and death benefits. In general, loans are not taxable, but withdrawals are taxable to the extent
they exceed basis in the contract. Loans outstanding at policy lapse or surrender prior to the death of the insured will
cause immediate taxation to the extent of gain in the contract.

A FINANCIAL LEADER FOR
OVER 135 YEARS
Prudential Financial is a worldwide financial
leader with a long tradition of serving the public
interest. Prudential Financial has approximately
50 million customers, and the well-known Rock
symbol is an icon of strength, stability, expertise,
and innovation that has stood the test of time.

Produced with the
environment in mind

Produced
Recycled Paper
Paper
Printed
ononRecycled
with__%
10%Post
Post-Consumer
With
ConsumerWaste
Waste

All guarantees and benefits of the insurance policy are backed by the claims-paying ability of the issuing company. Policy
guarantees and benefits are not backed by the broker/dealer and/or insurance agency selling the policy, nor by any of their
affiliates, and none of them make any representations or guarantees regarding the claims-paying ability of the issuing
insurance company.
Life insurance is issued by The Prudential Insurance Company of America, Pruco Life Insurance Company (except in NY
and/or NJ) and Pruco Life Insurance Company of New Jersey (in NY and/or NJ). All are Prudential Financial companies,
located in Newark, NJ, and each is solely responsible for its own financial condition and contractual obligations. Life
insurance policies contain exclusions, limitations, reductions of benefits, and terms for keeping them in force. Your financial
professional can provide you with costs and complete details.
This material contains references to concepts that have
legal, accounting, and tax implications. It is not intended
as legal, accounting, or tax advice. Consult your own
attorney and/or tax advisor for advice regarding your
particular situation. Accordingly, any information in this
document cannot be used by any taxpayer for purposes
of avoiding penalties under the Internal Revenue Code.

Securities and Insurance Products:
Not Insured by FDIC or Any Federal Government Agency.
May Lose Value.
Not a Deposit of or Guaranteed by Any Bank or Bank Affiliate.

Prudential, The Prudential logo, and the Rock symbol are service marks of Prudential Financial, Inc. and its related entities.
© 2015 Prudential Financial, Inc. and its related entities.
0251133

0251133-00002-00 Ed. 03/2015 Exp. 09/05/2016

